I'm Nick Schifrin over the
next hour we'll present
a PBS Newshour series
called Inside Putin's
Russia with the help of the
Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting producer Zac Fannin
and I travel to more than a
dozen cities, conducted 40
interviews and were arrested
twice will report on
Russian propaganda Russia's
opposition Russians who join
Isis and a tense relationship
with the US our first
story explores a new
Russian identity it's a
combination of religion old
Russian traditions and
rediscovered patriotism
this new identity helps
explain a lot about how
today's Russia thinks how
President Putin acts and why
he remains popular we begin
our series in the southern
city of Krassner it is
Sunday morning and Russia's
conservative South more
than 70 percent of Russians
or Orthodox Christian and
under President Vladimir
Putin the church has
been revitalized arch
priest Ivan garmisch
is known as father John
he tells parishioners
there's only one way to be
a true Christian and he says
being a true Christian is the
only way to be a true Russian
so ghusl Moscow the state
and my faith are united
they can't be separated the
values of the church and
the state coincide in
Russia faith is patriotic
the Orthodox Church
criticizes liberal Western
values as heresies while
Orthodox priests bless
Russian weapons and endorse
Putin politically and
personally the president's
faith increases his
popularity well he is a
religious man and he
takes part in the divine
worship with the people in
churches what the
president is doing what
the government is doing
of course we support it
because he acts conscientiously
and truthfully today's
re-energized Orthodox
Church helps create pride
in the shared religion
it is an historic Russian
symbols like Cossacks help
create pride and shared
traditions 500 years ago
Cossacks became the Russian
Czars henchmen they were
famous and feared and
helped police the Russian
empires borders the Soviets
persecuted them today's
Russia restores them Cossacks
fill crafts in our streets
an annual parade I believe
Russia should be governed by
tradition not the rule
of law not of only the
nation that has kept its
traditions and honors them
more than the law deserves
respect the strength of the
nation is in its traditions
for 17 years Vladimir Gromov
led the regional Cossack
army he revitalized this
event and helped get the
Cossack state sponsorship
President Putin awarded
him the order of friendship
medal gramado considers putin
the custodian of russian
pride and stability
preventing the chaos of the
1990 Linnea he gained putin
if it wasn't for President
Putin Russia as a state
would be struggling through
the toughest times now and
possibly may have ceased
to exist only Putin has
saved the state from total
collapse and in return
cossacks do what
they feel saves putin
during the 2014 Olympics the
band Pussy Riot performed
a song that disparages
poof Cossacks unleashed
their centuries-old
tradition of vigilante
violence last year cossacks
dows the main opposition
leader Alexei Navalny
attacked is fact and in
Kaliningrad when a small group
of demonstrators demanded
the government change its
foreign policy a Cossack
beat up 63 year old protester
Yevgeniy grecian he lost
80% of his eyesight well
our generation if the
regime can't suppress
civil protest through
legal means they punish the
people through affiliated
associations like the
Cossacks the regime acts
through them why have the
authorities crack down so
much what I see in Russia
statehood comes first and
human rights come last
they use any means to prove
the state is the most
important more important than
a human the idea that the
state is more important
than the people is actually
not new Russians have long
had a collective identity
for us the men is collective
concept we consider
ourselves to be the part of
the whole so to be Russian
means to share the same
the same cultural and
historic identity for years
TV fixture and firebrand
Alexandra Dugan inspired
the Kremlin ideology he
says Russia's collective
identity comes from
patriotism projection of
power and respect for the
rules Hooten taps into
all three connecting
today's Russia to its
Imperial grandeur butter
diesel is organic it is not
artificial Empire or
state is not something
additional artificial
because it is our breasts our
skin our organic way of life
today's kremlin uses that
patriotism to try and
unite the population and
convince them only a powerful
state can protect them
from enemies enemy number
one the US America is on
the brink of a revolution
Dugan in the Kremlin accused
the u.s. of humiliating
Russia by expanding NATO
to Russia's borders and
supporting revolutions in
former Soviet states and
satellites Dugan advocates
fighting back by attacking
the West with asymmetric
war you talk about
introducing geopolitical
disorder actively supporting
dissident movements
extremism racist sectarian
groups this seems much
more than just exactly as
usual it's exactly
what you are supporting
separatist group we are
supporting any kind of
admission with including
Russian nationals that is
against Putin my words
are a fear of what you are
doing it is near and you
are right so much
because you are doing
the same thing against us
in Ukraine that philosophy
was weaponized did he
die in eastern Ukraine
Russia aids local separatists
who fight against the
Ukrainian government that's
pro-western and in 2014 in
Crimea Russia helped install
separatist leaders who
rushed through a referendum
that led to Crimea's
annexation regime regime in
Russia Putin the day of
annexation Putin gave a
speech combining religion
patriotism and imperial
history he said the West
had been subjugating
Russia and Russia was finally
demanding respect yes or
no for assuming if you
compress the spring all the
way to its limit it will
snap back hard Russia is
an independent active
participant in international
affairs like other
countries it has its own
national interest that
need to be taken into
account and respected it
is impossible to overstate
how transformative eastern
Ukraine and here Crimea
have been in recent Russian
memory after the Crimea
annexation Putin's
popularity spiked to nearly
90 percent Russians told
pollsters that suddenly
they felt like a superpower
against the Germans and
Russians all over the
country mobilized she saves
brunettes Denis Solomon in
2014 fighting in eastern
Ukraine he's a former
soldier who was working a mid
management retail job when he
quit and crossed the border
it's just looseness to
work quicker now we hear
that behind us there's an
intense battle mortars and
shells are raining in our
direction Solomon went to
war because of that
collective Russian identity
he believed the Ukrainian
government was attacking
ethnic Russians death was a
those people who were under
fire I identified them as
Russian people who needed
protection by those who can
at least hold a weapon what
was it about them that you
felt I need to help them
those are the people with
the same culture as mine
the same language the
same worldview English
shootings he was convinced
of that by propaganda in May
2014 dozens of pro-russian
separatists died
in Odessa Ukraine I've
never felt equipped a woman
among young it probably
became the pivotal moment
there was a lot of information
about how people were
simply getting beaten and
killed but as anyway I must
Russian media exaggerated
yes even using an actress
to play a victim we
know she was an actress
because she appeared in
unrelated pro-russian
stories as three entirely
different people that
disinformation campaign
convinces the Kremlin's critics
the new Russian identity
is manufactured a product
of deception and repression
sometimes that repression
shows up in masks guns
and camouflage those are
special forces surrounding
66 year old ill me o merav
in the jacket and Jean
Loup merabh is a leader of
the Tatars a Muslim minority
in Crimea he and other
Tatars fight the Russian
annexation in response many
Tatars have been jailed on
questionable charges and
Umarov was thrown into a
local insane asylum we're
good the film is together
so this all together
we call one big act of
intimidation the purpose
is to silence some and keep
others ignorant turn them
into zombies so they think
the same thing these are
the necessary conditions
in order for the people to
be loyal to their government
but do you acknowledge
that that is the majority of the
population who feels that way
career synchronously of
course of course we can't
say that this is a stupid
population or stupid people
they're just living in a
constellation of fear and
the propaganda machine
rolls over them like a
steamroller Umarov may accuse
Putin of manipulating the
population but under Putin
Russia has revitalized
majority religion brought
back historic tradition
and projects power so until
there's an alternative
he'd considered the creator
and will remain the caretaker
of the new Russian identity
for years the Kremlin
and the media it controls
have waged a multifaceted
information and
disinformation campaign
inside Russia and pointed
externally and it's
perceived adversaries and last
year that effort crescendoed
here during the u.s.
presidential campaign
so our second story is about the
information war the media
publishing Dogu Sudarsan
in russia whoever controls
the media controls the
country and Saturday
night sir sir Gabriel EOS
sourcing that the 44
year old is an anchor for
Russia one if the country's
most popular channel and
its state-owned do you think
that that means that you
have a Russian perspective
when you report the
Russian perspective these a
perspective of your country
in any reporting brilli
of says he doesn't feel
pressure to push the
government's line during the
show we saw he challenged the
government minister about
police jailing a former
theater director who's a
government critic I imagined
that tomorrow tonight's
the broadcast I may
have in some security agencies
in saying what I think
he's saying Russian state
media have long delivered
the government perspective
and rallied the public
behind it really of denies
that's his job but he
hints at whose job it is a
sandy program which is quite
conservative in western terms
ultra-conservatives I would
say aggressive perhaps
Oh Fox News pass car
apart or CMEs Sunday night
anchored Dimitri Kiselyov
is part Sean Hannity
part Stephen Colbert he's crass
and entertaining and widely
believed to reflect the
Kremlin's thinking Americans
get Priuses again yet
the American press is driving
Trump into a bullfight
with no rules the aim is
impeachment no pretext it
will be created invented
engineered exaggerated
thought my architect Eero
CIA staff hackers are
hiding behind another name
for example behind the
so-called Russian hackers kiss
we have started targeting
Russia's opponents in
2012 an inch Nikko massive
protests threaten President
Vladimir Putin says
journalist and author
Mikael digger that was very
important to start hating
the enemies that's the the
point when the audience
starts bleeding you when I
see it Russia is the only
country in the world and is
realistically capable of
turning the United States
into radioactive ash so
Putin got all moving until
2015 Ziegler was the anchor
and editor-in-chief of TV
reign in a sea of state media
TV rain was an independent
TV island we've had
reputation of the ala TV
channel that is trying to
make real investigations in a
Kenyan assignment in
2014 TV reign accused the
Kremlin's cheap political
strategist of corruption
that was very short but
very effective campaign
against us I was getting
like hundreds of personal
messages with people wishing
me that then all the major
networks had direct phone
calls from Kremlin and they
had to switch us off within
one month their audience
dropped from 20 million
to 60 thousand protesters
fought to keep them on the
air but targeting critical
media is nothing new in
the last six years the
Kremlin's targeted 12 critical
newsrooms say president
ronpa so the GAR says
state TV tries to convince
russians to support their
government by replacing
reality with a carefully
crafted message democracy
does not exist our system is
much more stable because
we we have much more much
stronger leadership which in
consumption Putin is
universally accepted as
one of the most qualified
heads of state on the planet
if not the most qualified
but this isn't only about
shaping Russian opinion
guess we all considers
the news a weapon aimed at
Russia's enemies as he
put it in an interview on
his own channel well you
see what my by absorbing
it if you can persuade a
person you don't need to kill
in let's think about
what's better to kill or
to persuade because if you
weren't able to persuade
then you'll have to
kill if the politics of
defending your country's
interest is pro-russian
then probably a pro-russian
margarita simeon is the
editor-in-chief of our team
formerly known as russia
today she says the network
reaches 35 million viewers
day in six languages including
American and international
channels its stay down
and aimed foreign audiences
as an alternative to
channel Simeone calls
pro-western CNN and BBC
if you look at any station
you will see that what
people are reporting comes
from what they believe
in where they stand their
background what their
countries believe in and let
it be one of the voices in
that quiet American and
coalition forces are in the
early stages of military
operations because when the
choir sings just one song
awful things happen like
the war in Iraq critics
say our tea isn't just
another media voice it
highlights conspiracy
theories the article
basically accuses the u.s. of
manufacturing the Cibola
outbreak it describes a
Holocaust denier as a human
rights activist Russia is
a threat to us is hegemony
and a neo-nazi is a German
expert Germany is the
country which supports
violent Islamist criticism is
again that you're trying
to confuse rather than
inform now that's absolutely
a lie we're never trying
to confuse we're informing
if we do have people
appearing on the air life
that are later found out
to be Holocaust deniers or
anything like that we
in middle immediately
put them onto a list of
people have rapport forbidden
from the air you are
telling me that people in
the West are seeing as
well believe me most of the
people in Russia I see in
the west of the threat for
the West the biggest threat
in terms of information
comes from that building
that is the headquarters
of the FSB successor to the
KGB during Soviet times
the KGB launched deliberate
disinformation campaign like
planting the idea that President
Kennedy was killed by the CIA
today Western governments
accused the FSB of
launching the same kinds of
campaigns except instead
of offering communism as
an ideological alternative
they're waging a kind of
hybrid war against their
enemies with a new kind of
soldier hackers over
the last two years the
Russian military ran online
recruiting ads where
soldiers put down their
guns to fight a cyber war
in a January report US
intelligence agencies
accused Russia of hacking
Democratic National
Committee and Hillary
Clinton campaign emails and
leaking them to WikiLeaks
to fuel Russia's
propaganda campaign it was
designed to quote undermine
public faith in the u.s.
democratic process denigrate
Secretary Clinton and
harm her electability and
potential presidency it
worked the Clinton campaign
has now had to deal
with more than a week of
embarrassing daily revelations
thanks to WikiLeaks
now these wiki leak release
have rocked the campaign
WikiLeaks has released what
appears to be transcripts
of paid speeches by
Hillary Clinton to Goldman
Sachs hacked emails became
anti-clinton talking points
and many of those talking
points were spread online
by fake accounts known
as trolls believed to
work in the st. Petersburg
building 42 year old Marat
mindy ARA used to be one
of those trolls suddenly
you see a lot of comments
at night and they're always
saying yes and this is
actually the people are
doing their job they have
their coffee they have
a time to do it their
identities every day Mindi RF
would get a document that
instructed him what to write
on christmas eve 2014 he
was told to quote create
a negative attitude about
obama's foreign policy so
he posted photos comparing
Obama to Hitler portraying
the u.s. as a fish
about to eat the planet
and an eagle sharpening
his talons he posted under
the headline can the US take
Russia out on 50 websites
in 23 cities and fellow
trolls kirilov Ashkan Gennady
Orlov Mike Brandon expressed
the exact same thought
six hundred posts from 70
fake accounts in 12 hours
just one battalion in a sock
puppet army manufactured
by a handful of trolls
how many identities will
the workers be expected to
pretend to be 100 hundred
really hundred I myself
made to have 2030 I didn't
count them US intelligence
says the likely troll
financier is Afghani priests
Koshien a businessman
with catering companies
he's been dubbed Putin's
personal chef Mindy Aarav left
the factory because he
didn't believe in its product
but he says it's effective
because the stories are
succinct and echoed widely
everything is very simple
there yeah Blair my real
father the second quiet
Russian propaganda is
actually very predictable
and relatively simple and I
think of it as the four DS
which are dismiss distort
distract dismay then
Nemo is an Atlantic
Council senior fellow
studying how Russian media
hacking and trolling combined
you get your own people
to write this but then
you pretend it's not your
people is just some do-gooders
in Russian society all
the different parts of your
machine then amplify it
and what you're doing is
you're pushing out in dozen
different languages on all
the different platforms
there are one story and
what that story is what
the Kremlin wants it to be
dellavedova say to yourself
in January 2016 it was a
fake story that a Russian
German teenager had been
abducted and raped by Muslim
migrants Russian state
TV apparatus repeatedly
reporting false claims after
the German police had come
out and said there was no
abduction and there was no
rape but if the fake story
helps parts real protests
against German Chancellor
Merkel a frequent Putin
critic but even though it
was fake Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov used it
to criticize one of Russia's
taught adversaries the
motivation behind the
campaign as a whole was
precisely to weaken Merkel
by amplifying this this
very personalized story
about crimes committed
by in a vertical most
mackerels migrants we
investigate the stories
misrepresented by the mainstream
media last year the
Russian propaganda machine
exploited a research
psychologist who argued
Google was manipulating
its results to favor
Clinton so this is a
gentleman called dr. Robert
Epstein he came out with a
paper which said that by
altering the results of
a search engine you could
potentially alter people's
voting choices and Google
support for Clinton
is is really very strong
it was quickly debunked but
the different parts of the
Russian propaganda machine
echoed the story from
RT to State on website
Sputnik to Russian trolls
this was a classic example
in which the different
parts of the machine were
amplifying each other
what you then had was the
claim being picked up by a
number of larger conservative
media in the US it
like Google is in the tank
for Hillary there's no
question about it and there
you've divorced the
story from the source
well you've laundered you
literally I know that says
that the source has been
laundered then candidate
Trump said was the effect
of Google was ringing its
results in favor of
Clinton Google search agent
was suppressing the bad
news about Hillary Clinton
now we don't know where he
got that from but we know
that to be an assertion
point for that story
were they crammed in this
information at that for
any purveyor of propaganda
your dream is to have some
high-value amplifier
amplifying you especially
if you can contrive that in
such a way that you were
divorced from it how about
oh how about that next we
travel to Russia's southernmost
border the Republic of
Dagestan is in the North
Caucasus a kind of bridge
between Asia and Europe
over the last two decades
Dagestan each have fought
a brutal separatist
insurgency against the
Russian state with
violence spilling over from
neighboring Chechnya where
Russia's fought two wars
Americans might know
Dagestan because the Boston
Marathon bombers were
Dagestan II immigrants but
now there's a new problem
by one estimate as many
as 5,000 Dagestan E's
or fighting for Isis we
traveled to Dagestan to
try and understand why
so many Dagestan E's are
fighting in Syria and Iraq
if any some change it
is no accident that the
youth are tempted to go to
serious because today there
is a revival of Islam kazeem
nurmagomedov is 62 years
old and his son fought for
Isis he was never tempted
to go to Syria but he and
his wife Rashida understand
why their son marat was
well there the islam the
islamic color was talking
about the one in every muslim
soul is hidden deep down
it's like a light in
someone's heart nurmagomedov
lives deep in the caucasus
mountains were nearly
dried up rivers meander
through thousand foot high
cliffs and beyond ancient
rock formations isolated
dirt roads connect
secluded villages one of
those villages is Kurata
official population is 4,000
but residents say it's
half that size this area
is nearly a hundred percent
Muslim before Friday prayers
men greet each other in
the small town center
there are a few young
people in part because this
village sent as many as two
dozen to Isis al-qaeda and
the wars in Syria and Iraq
that's her that's another
Amina kondakova is a
Muslim convert she shows me
photos from a happier time
that's very cute she says
they grew up traditional
and comfortable and then two
years ago her daughter
Miriam and her son Alyoshka
told her they were going on
vacation instead they
traveled with Miriam's
husband to Mosul Iraq to join
Isis who told mom they lied
to me about going there
I was so disappointed and
then I became afraid about
what could happen to them
she says this town is
pious but wasn't really
just enough for her daughter
did she feel judged by
people in this society
the closest weapon yes
they gave her looks they
didn't like how she was
dressing they wanted her
to dress like everyone else
she wanted to dress the way
it's written for a Muslim
woman to dress kondakova
believes that judgement
drove her daughter away
she reluctantly admits
that in Mosul her daughter
is happy raising her
first grandson mama Yakult
is his mom I feel like I
was reborn here I regret
all those years I spent in
Dagestan don't you want
to come here too I want to
live with you I want you to
see my boy growing up and
Herman Chamitoff gets to see his
grandson when his son
Murat left for Syria he
abandoned a pregnant wife Oh
Alexei is now three years
old they look at photos of
Murad as a boy and a young
Murad clowning around with
his older brother shamil
when you look at these
doesn't make you wish that
your sons could all be
here with you together yeah
daddy yes I am a realist
I know there's no
return life isn't a book
where you can tear out
the pages if you didn't
like what you wrote
and write new ones
the Dagestan youth who
fought for Isis continued a
decade's old legacy here of
radicalism and militancy
there's been a local
insurgency here in the capital
Dagestan mahadji allah
for years targeting both
local authorities and
symbols of the national
government their most
prominent attacks targeted
civilians in larger cities
in Moscow in 2010 militants
allied with al-qaida blew
up the subway in 2013 in
Volgograd they blew up
the bus station and then a
commuter bus as seen
on Russian media
nimbala so suddenly there
was no social or physical
protection every day there
were bombings terror
attacks that calls people's
lives a be Magomedov is a
former police lieutenant
colonel and member of
Dagestan anti-terrorism
committee he says conservative
Islam combined with
high rates of unemployment
and poverty to radicalize
the reunion it's the
living conditions absence
of possibilities absence
of social mobility
which creates waves of
anger and distress there
has to be some sort of
history that sets the
person on a certain track
where you only need to
light a match for the fire
to start that match is
often a brutal security
crackdown in January 2013
Russian Special Forces
flooded into Dagestan II
villages local state security
services have practice
collective punishment
against entire families
torture even extrajudicial
executions mama Mehta
admits they went too far but
he tries to explain their
motivation well yes the if
keeping people safe
requires limiting rights
and freedoms of certain
individuals it's probably worth
it my brother died in 1990
when someone threw a
grenade in his house you
know the freedom of one man
ends where the freedom of
another starts today the
violence is diminished but
it's still religious
Muslims whose freedoms are
most often restricted this
mosque practices an austere and
aggressive form of Islam
it also rails against
government policy and that
makes it a police target after
prayers police set up a
checkpoint officers must
meet a monthly quota of
arrests leading to what
many call indiscriminate
- tensions including of
journalists trying to tell
the mosque story we were
filming that scene from
across the street - standing
on the sidewalk for only
about 90 seconds when
police came up and arrested
US they threw us into
their car they drove us to
the precinct they refused
to tell us why they were
arresting it and when we were
in the station we thought
dozens of men have been
in that mock before also
arrested that is simply
how police here act thirty
three-year-old manga met
Magomedov is the mosque
spokesman Levitt I drew G as
you saw yourself they arrest
people not because they're
suspicious but only because
they came to a mosque
do you think that the
tactics that the police used
can help radicalize young
people here there is - of
course this is the thing
that provokes people since
literally everyone can
be arrested not on the
basis of actual cause but
something totally subjective
then of course that
irritates and that helped
lead so many to Isis the
group exploits the abuse
ahia Russian language
propaganda says Russia
oppresses Muslims and present
Syrian Iraq as a pious
paradise fit for family and
as Isis recruited Dagestan
ease Russian security
services showed some the
door exporting extremism by
facilitating their travel
to Syria this first of Allah
brothers doing it was the
right thing to do since
the moment these people
left Dagestan for Syria
local terrorism dropped
dramatically if they had
stayed there would have
been terror attacks there
would have been human
casualties who helped you
leave who facilitated your
departure one of those who
was pushed is this 27 year
old Dagestan who now lives
in Turkey we agreed to hide
his face and alter his voice
Rugel river holes of people
who were on the federal
wanted list could somehow
get a passport and leave
the country some security
officers said to them will
either kill you or you
can leave the country the
way I was helped was that
every time I went to my
local government office I
was taken by the police and
interrogated but when I went
to get a passport nobody
stopped me and after the
dagestan he's left Russia
made sure they never came
back we're apostles they
simply said that if I come
back they'll do bad things
to me so I won't ever go
back many dagestanis
who fought for Isis have
died in Syria and they're
celebrated by Isis propaganda
but some managed to escape
often to the port city
of Odessa Ukraine former
Isis fighter Marat agreed
to talk to us if we didn't
show his face well since
the majority went to Syria
with the notion of jihad
that Assad was repressing
Muslims and we needed to help
them really we've actually
already met maraj
he's the son of Kazim Norma
Gannett off because neem
is often in Odessa to visit
is she oh-hoh she says
we consider our family
lucky he is back alive and
healthy and realized that
where he ended up wasn't
what he thought it was when
his son left for Syria kazeem
didn't sit back and let
him die he traveled to the
outskirts of Aleppo and
saw the destruction he
helps convince Murad he'd
made a mistake Marat
finally left when he thought
about his own son the more
thoughtful I was thinking
about him constantly hoping
that I could leave and
see my child I was always
thinking about what
a big mistake I made
thank God I was able to
leave there alive because
practically everyone I
knew there no one is
left alive they all died
there Marat will never
return here to Dagestan
and that's what's inspired
Kazim to speak on camera
for the first time the
Asian who did come there
are thousands of Isis
fighters in Syria who want
to leave I feel it maybe
my story will be a lesson
how to do it what obstacles
to expect I feel some sort
of responsibility to use
my experience to help get
others out people like cos
Eames neighbor Amina she
fears her daughter is
dead she hadn't heard
from her in four months
what would you say to a
mother in America who's
listening to this story
well yet subscribe to
new Qaddafi don't let
your children go anywhere
look after them look after
there every step but don't
let them leave you ever
but their children have
left this place and most
will never return next we
look at the fate of some
of the Kremlin's enemies
according to one study in
the last three years 38
prominent Russians have been
the victims of unsolved
murders or suspicious
deaths the high mortality
rate has a long history
but critics say it's
emblematic of how President
Vladimir Putin runs today's
Russia in today's Russia
there are consequences to
criticizing the state we tell
protesters their rally isn't
sanctioned they're asking
President Vladimir Putin
not to run for reelection
this demonstration is
sponsored by the opposition
group open Russia from
saint-petersburg and
across the country police
arrested more than a hundred
protesters it is democratic
opposition activists are
being arrested and given
lengthy prison sentences
it is members of the
Democratic opposition who are
being forced into exile a
harassed or attack unloaded
35 year old Vladimir
Carr Mirza is open
russia's vice chairman
he's an outspoken activist
demonstrating against
putin and organizing
protests we first sat down
with him late last year we
believe in the rule of law
would be different human
rights we believe that
Russia should enjoy the
same democratic institutions
of the rest of Europe enjoys
to try and create those
democratic institutions he
teamed up with the man
he calls his mentor or a
stem Soph a former Deputy
Prime Minister who became
the country's leading
dissident the two travelled to
Washington to highlight the
mysterious death of Sergei
Magnitsky a lawyer who
exposed corruption among senior
officials nemstov and cara mirza
convinced the US Congress
to freeze the assets of
Russians believed connected to
Magnitsky's death these
people in account Russian
regime who rule like to
keep you know the money the
asset in the West they won
a vacation in the West's
and the kids to churches
schools to the west and
this you know personal
accountability may well be
the only thing that will
make them think twice a
little more than two years
later Nemtsov was assassinated
a few hundred feet from
the Kremlin walls his death
was brazen and shocking this
is the spot where Boris
Nemtsov was killed and you
can see the corner of the
Kremlin right there just hundred
yards away and you can see the
memorial for him that's on
this bridge today in Moscow
a court sentenced five
people in themselves
murder whether or not they
were the mastermind they
permanently silenced them
sobs outspoken criticism you
live in car Mirza believed
someone used poison to
silence him too I started
suddenly feeling really really
sick and within the space
of 15 to 20 minutes I
went from feeling could be
normal like I am now to
having a really rapid heart
rate sweating palpitations
started vomiting and then
I just lost consciousness
kidneys I think one first
and it was the heart the
lungs the stomach the liver
everything everything just
shutdowns I have no doubt
that this was deliberate
attempt to murder based
on my political activities
motivated by my activities in
the Russian opposition
there are people working
as opposition who are not
targeted what is the line
that you apparently crossed
there's a clear line
between just saying things
that are against the
regime and it's a totally
different thing to go
off to their own personal
interests after their pockets
the history of assassination
goes back decades in 1940
Leon Trotsky was killed
with an ice axe in 2006
crusading Russian journalist
Anna Politkovskaya
was murdered and in 2014
Alexander Litvinenko
a former intelligence agent
who accused Putin of ordering
polar Kostas death was
killed by radioactive T
Dennis Warren n Coppedge
lawmaker who defected to
Ukraine and became a Putin
critic in March he was
walking down the street in
Kiev when a gunman shot him
three times his body bled
out on the sidewalk in the
middle of the day Maria
mock Zhukova is his widow I
was reading about my first
spring and Keith was
beneath I was screaming so
desperately first I thought
it's very nuts to be born at
all when you lose something like
moxa Cova lives in kiev
where she's raising
their son in Moscow
she and Lauren in Cabo
lawmakers allied with Putin
and they enjoyed the spoils
that come from power but he'd
also been an investigator
who uncovered corruption
in the Russian intelligence
agency the FSB who do you
think killed your husband
he had certain enemies and
these enemies are in the
FSB the anti-corruption
schemes that he would
investigate from here
that is lots of money
and lots of influence
lots of of everything
physicians and that is
something that they would
not let him do Russia calls
her claim a fabrication
but his death fits a
pattern a once loyal family
member becomes an outspoken
opponent and ends up dead
my family you can be born
in truth it can be adopted
inted can't believe it
voluntarily people who have
tried to leave the Putin
family voluntarily have
not fared very well
Masha Gessen is a Russian
journalist author and
prolific anti-putin activist
you've been dubbed by some
an enemy of the state are
you an enemy of the state
well I'm certainly an
enemy of them office in
absolutely yeah I'm not an
enemy of the Russian
state gessen was the first
journalist blacklisted by
Putin's Kremlin she's also
been targeted because she's
a lesbian who's raising
adopted children nothing
Western woman you want to do a
new health intervention
up of micromanagement
condemnable of dog
warden in 2013 she helped
lead a video campaign
criticizing an anti-gay
propaganda law it helped
condone homophobia and attacks
on gay Russians and Gessen
argues the law explains
how Putin rules the
autocrat needs everybody
out in the street would
would Flags aloft they need
that's primaries they
need for mobilization
to have mobilization you
need to have it you can
have all the beauty people
as enemies today and then
you can have Americans
tomorrow and keep the LGBT
people in your back pocket and
then pull them out and you
need them again and Gessen
says above it all is a
boss served by loyal
lieutenants who don't need
explicit instructions to
launch attacks let a
patriarchal family will fit in
you know do I always have to
tell you what to do like
don't you know what the
right thing to do is
that the Kremlin kill is
political enemies hundred
percent sure not the
Kremlin denied our interview
request but Sergey Markov
a member of Putin's
party and Russia's national
strategic Council reflects
the Kremlin's defense
counterpunch and embraced
conspiracy theories starting
with the assassinated
opposition leader Boris
Nemtsov who organized his
killing I strongly believe
that it's terroristic
organization as both
intelligence service of Ukraine
Ukraine calibers names
you not you create the
Ukraine is country you know
captured by terrorists but
terrorists who captured
Ukraine they killed by
eating soup but it's more
than observe right Vladimir
karmerz has been poisoned
twice Anna post gaya was
was killed there there
are a lot of people who
criticized the Kremlin
who end up dead first
of all not too much this
atmosphere which is killing
people exist but this
atmosphere had been created not
by Vladimir Putin but by
Western countries against
Russia for the people
Putin target that argument
is an attempt to distract
Russia surrounded by enemies
we should support even
stronger than before our
leader etc etc there's a
standard propaganda for
any of territory and resume
mikhail kasyanov was Putin's
first prime minister in
the early 2000s the two
worked together to pass
much-needed economic
reforms in 2004 Putin fired
him in castiana became an
outspoken opposition
politician appearing
alongside Boris Nemtsov and
Vladimir car Mirza last
year a prominent Putin Ally
posted a video of him and
Kara Mirza in crosshairs
but not all of the Kremlin's
enemies end up dead some
end up humiliated how did
they target you on television
go there blackmailing
me and just creating your
two stories etc as ever
five months before 2015
elections state television
broadcast castiana having
sex with his assistant
the video helped fracture
is party they will try to
destroy publicly to destroy
morally and reputation of
all of us and they're doing
this quite successfully
and they day and they they
can book and here doing
this is there anything you
can do to stop them we
cannot do anything because
we have no protection
we have no free and fair
elections we have censorship
in the media we have
political prayers more than
100 political prisoners
now in Russia today
one year after he nearly
died from poisoning car
Mirza got better and
restarted his work in February
he was a few hours away
from boarding a plane to
Washington where his
family lives for their
safety when he says he was
poisoned a second time we
sat down with him and his
wife yevgenia in March I
couldn't breathe and at this
stage you know when you're
lying there trying to gasp
for air you know I think
I felt just life slowly
going out of the whole
body and I remember that
distinct feeling this is
it is it again now I'm going
to die the only thing I
was able to do I called
my wife if Kenya who was
here in the United States I
asked them to take him to
the hospital to the same
medical team that had
treated him in 2015
had it been on a plane
had it been alone in his
apartment had it been
somewhere with I don't know in
the streets of Moscow
oh my god he didn't talk
Karl Mirza had noticed that
almost every night Moscow
city workers removed Boris
nemtsov's memorial so we
made a film to protect his
mentor's career and life
buddy screams wolf on
Norwegian analogy what film
was the most difficult thing I
ever did in my life this film
is about the portrait of a man
who could it's not for a
quirk of fate a very well
become president of Russia do
you miss him Turner was
this quite fortunate
sort the risks they do
hit closed home closer and
closer every time have you
ever asked him not to go
back it is very fine I'm not
going to lie to you but I
want him to continue
to do what he thinks is
important what he thinks is
right and her fate allows
car Mirza to keep his faith
that he can change the
system he says after recovering
he'll go back to Russia
to finish the work that
he and nemstov started Vladimir
Putin is now serving an
unprecedented third term
as russia's president
and he's expected to seek
another six-year term in
next year's presidential
election putin's been
widely popular but this
spring for the first time
in years there were large
anti-government demonstrations
across the country
this is the season of
Russia's discontent under
President Vladimir Putin
there's been a tacit
agreement that people enjoy
their lives and stay at a
politics now many Russians
are deciding that bargains
no longer worth it the
value of him respect until
recently people were thinking
politics were somewhere
far away but now people
understand politics hits
close to home 38 year-old
Alexei kodoroff and his
neighbors had considered
themselves a political
but they launched these
protests when the city of
Moscow planned to evict them
from their apartments to
knock them down and build
high-rises as always police
presence was strong but
some Russians fear of their
state seems to be fading
and faith in themselves
rising do you think you
can make a difference
that one wasn't with me we
can change things if we stay
together we need to stay
active it's very important
right now to recreate civil
society for the last five
years civil society has
almost disappeared in the
1960s the former Soviet
Union built coder AUVs
apartment complexes inexpensive
housing your home is home
for people like him to
have their own space
whatever I'll go inside it's
nice with a view of the
Moscow River quarter of
accuses local officials of
wanting to seize valuable
land to rich Jefferson
wozmak busca now is a
very important moment the
people are starting to
unite to show the government
their point of view I
was gonna but it has the
man most responsible for
creating that unity is
Alexei Navalny the 41 year
old lawyer is the country's
most prominent opposition
politician on a crusade
against corruption evil I've
never mind look what he
did just because the ruling
United Russia party the party
of crooks and thieves in
March he posted an hour-long
YouTube expose about
mansions yachts and land
that he says were corruptly
acquired by Putin's Prime
Minister Dmitry Medvedev we
did Medvedev can steal so
much and so openly because
Putin does the same but
on a greater scale the
system is so rotten there's
nothing healthy left the
volleys been fighting Putin
for six years in 2011 he
sparked massive protests
ahead of a parliamentary
election he called rigged
let's in raw food it's very
simple power to the people
two years later he ran
unsuccessfully for Moscow
mayor against the Putin
backed incumbent yes some will
Chuck today by using YouTube
Navalny circumvent state-run
media and maintains a
huge following this video
has 23 million views at
the mashallah this is our
country and these swindlers
are stealing our money everyone
should fight however he can
tens of thousands of people
answered his call on March
26 and June 12th Russians
launched the most
widespread unsanctioned
protests in a quarter
century they were held in
185 cities nearly all the
protesters were young and
motivated to speak
out by corruption
Putin's a thief they
chanted police joined the
people they say don't serve
the government of monsters
police declined our
invitation and arrested
1,700 protesters across the
country including Navalny
he was sentenced to 25
days in jail for organizing
an unsanctioned rally
he was also arrested
and jailed in March and back
in 2014 he was convicted
of a felony defrauding
clients of a shipping company
helped his brother Oleg start
Oleg remains in prison
Alexei calls his brother
a hostage and the charges
fabricated his conviction
means legally he can't
run for office that hasn't
stopped him from campaigning
for next year's presidential
election we want you
won you dog food we do not
owe the government anything
it is the government
who owes us they build an
authoritarian regime that
doesn't give anything back
his rallies are unusual
in a country where retail
campaigning is almost
unheard of the crowds are
young and he talks like
them Lorna she says they
think we have no right to
ask questions that we have
to shut up and listen they
tell us you and we have to
say oh okay we're very sorry
but no we have gathered
here to say we're going
to ask these questions and
will obtain the answers
his anti-corruption message
resonates with me and I
think that he is a very
charismatic politician 23
year old cyril Kozlovsky
and anyone in the crowd who
wanted one got a photo
with Navalny Kozlowski
promptly posted it to his
profile on VK russia's
equivalent of facebook
Kozlovsky acknowledges that
Putin has brought relative
prosperity to Russia he's
not even old enough to
remember the political and
economic chaos that Putin
helped end when he came
to power in 1999 what would
you say to your parents
or grandparents who say
look things were a lot worse
for us before President
Putin in the 18 years
that have passed he and
his team could have done
a lot more to help the
situation a lot more to
make it better and he didn't
so did the blame for this
in Cheboksary 375 miles
east of Moscow the local
government made sure no one in
the city center would rent
space to the Navalny campaign
so as gatherings take
place on the edge of
towns like this apartment
complex as a guy father
Semyon coach ken is the
local campaign manager a
level coletek see we were
rejected by all the landlord's
by all the hotels even
the International hotels
even construction fields
rejected us coach Ken
says he's been targeted
personally last year on
VK he posted a clip from
comedian John Oliver's HBO
program last week tonight
scamming Aussies is the
best thing anyone did on
earth thanks wait the video
shows band Isis symbols and
coach Ken was arrested for
extremism he took a selfie
in the back of a police
car he accuses the
government of exploiting
anti-terrorism laws to
silence novotny's campaign
by ellicott we are
constantly fighting with the
authorities and it's always
one-sided because when it
comes to election season
they make it impossible
local police also arrested
35 year old Andre Yusupov
he's the local orchestra's
first violin on March 26th
he joined the Navalny protest
and a week later police
interrupted a rehearsal to
take him to jail I asked
him if he thought he'd be
arrested for protesting
if Navalny were president
yeah absolutely beautiful
couplet I'm absolutely
certain this would not
happen because under Alexei
Navalny the country will
be more open Alexia's for
transparency and only with
transparency can we overpower
corruption arrests are
only one way the Russian
establishment pushes back
directed in the one ample
will Sheila's state TV
portrays novela knees
protests as an existential
threat to Russia stability
listen to what the country's
most popular anchor
said last month see when
the provocative they use
people to provoke the crowd
and make the situation
spiral out of control achieving
chaos first in one square in
one city and then they plunge
the entire country into
poverty I'm afraid to say
civil war government-run
high schools for students
to watch a video comparing
Navalny to Hitler accusing
him of being a fascist
trying to undermine the state
but for the first time
in a generation young
people are rejecting
the government talking
points in a classroom
2,000 miles from Moscow
students posted a video of
themselves challenging a
government funded school
teacher who called Navalny
supporters freaks and
defended corruption in the
state home drive a second
avocado would cool yeah
another thing you gotta
mine now I am young but I
like impulsive and you must
have been dealing the
pressure on Navami himself is
sometimes physical last year
members of the pro-government
Cossacks doused Navalny
with milk and beat up its
staff in April a state TV
channel showed an assailant
after he sprayed in a
volley with green dye
and chemicals Navalny is
right I needed surgery
Navalny accused the Kremlin of
organizing the attack
no does really let's get
backwards even if I look
like this does that mean that
we will accept money's
been stolen and used to
buy yachts I don't think so
more Navalny x' poll numbers
remain low but he's changing
public opinion 2/3 of
Russians now identify
corruption as the country's
number one problem
President Putin
avoids responding to
Navalny substantively
but the Navalny effect
means at a town hall in
moscow where questions are
usually screened in
advance this teenager
dared to ask Putin about
corrupt officials undermining
the public's faith in
government but for the
Dominions oh how are you
planning to solve this problem
Putin responded and venules
digital applause pathetic
you read your question
did you prepare it yourself
or did someone put you
up to it little life
prepared me for this question
hey that's vastly while
he's inspired the younger
generation some fellow Putin
opponents criticized Navalny
for being a nativist six
years ago he released
videos comparing immigrants who
work in Russia to cockroaches
if only stands by the videos
instead he wants to appeal
the Nationalists which
is why he rarely criticizes
Putin's muscular and
popular foreign policy in
Ukraine and Syria Navalny
turns down interview requests
including ours and tries
to keep the focus on
corruption you save your
harshest criticism of the
president for his domestic
policy obviously not his
foreign policy in fact
you don't talk very much
about its foreign policy is
that because you agree
with most available
avenues two-party system I
don't talk a lot about
foreign policy because here
everyone is interested in
wages income and bad roads
he tries to feed populism
to an audience that's
hungry he highlights
government corruption to
people who feel they have
nothing to lose and he's
trying to convince a
generation and perhaps the
country that politics
requires participation
and finally the us-russia
relationship to say it's been
tense is an understatement
so next we try and
understand how Washington
sees Russia and how Russia
sees the United States on
Russia's most patriotic
holiday Russians of all ages
remember what they consider
their finest moment they
mark the anniversary of
victory in World War
two by honoring the dead
Korea nom nom ovitch his
grandfather fought the
Nazis he says Russian
the US were once allies
and should be again we can
finally read what you really
want to love you and be
friends with you we are
waiting for you to finally
meet us halfway for Russians
it's the u.s. who's
unwilling to come halfway
many here believe President
Trump wants to improve
things but is being blocked
by what Dmitri sheikin
calls the American establishment
we'll go area by Lee to
cool Trump wants to do
something but he's forced
to follow the general
political line Donald Trump is
the most right-wing
candidate of the Republican
Party perhaps nobody
expressed more hope in
Trump's and Alexander
Dugan a right-wing TV
firebrand and philosopher
who's helped inspire the
Kremlin's ideology really we
supported trumpism which
supported our agenda Dugan says
the Kremlin saw Trump is
a kindred spirit who vowed
not to meddle in turn
ash
we supported this choice of
anti-establishment conservative
America revolution that
changed when President
Trump ordered a missile
strike on Russia ally Syria
and Teddy felt he must
respond to a chemical weapons
attack as long as America
stands for justice then
peace and harmony will
in the end prevail we
trusted not in trump as
pro-russian figure we
trusted in trump realist
and we are disappointed the
disappointment and tensions
have been growing last
month over the Baltic Sea a
Russian jet flew within
5 feet of a US Air Force
reconnaissance plane that same
week a NATO Jets shadowed
the Russian defense
ministers plane and a Russian
jet came up and rocked
its wings demonstrated
was armed last year the
Obama administration accused
Russia of hacking the
election and then seized
Russian properties and
increased sanctions all
of that has led to Russian
frustration Maria Zakharova
is the Foreign Ministry
spokeswoman we were
trying to establish normal
relationship normal didn't
know this word normal
relationship what is wrong
with food president and
I have been discussing
various things going very
well last week the u.s. took
steps toward normalization
presidents Trump and Putin
announced a deal on Syria
both presidents called their
meeting the first step to
warming the relationship
asturias if we develop our
relations in the same way
there is every reason to
believe that we would be
able to at least partially
restore the level of
interaction that we need
the president echoed that
hope on sunday he tweeted he
wouldn't dwell on 2016
hacking and wrote now is
the time to move forward and
working constructively with
russia foaming-at-the-mouth
this is not the
language other Trump
administration officials use
about Russia on Syria how
many more children have
to die before Russia cares
now is the my view on
Ukraine
we do call on Russia to exercise
influence over this
separatist in the region
whom they do hold complete
control over and on
potent personally this is
a man for whom veracity
translated into English the
one senior administration
official who's declined
to echo that criticism is
Donald Trump if candidate
and president wouldn't it
be a great thing if we could
actually get along with
Russia with nothing sir
a respect vote is a strong
leader I can tell you that
unlike what we have we
have a pathetic leader
Putin C kill'uh a lot of
killers get a lot of killers
while you think our country's so
innocent and last week in Warsaw
President Trump once
again questioned the US
intelligence community's
unanimous assessment that
Russia hacked the 2016
election I think it was Russia
but I think it was probably
other people and or countries
and I see nothing wrong
with that statement nobody
really knows at the very
least giving the president
all the benefit of a doubt
this is very bizarre behavior
Democratic Senator Mark
Warner is the vice
chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee we are
seeking to determine if
there is an actual fire
but there is clearly a lot
of smoke Warner's
helping lead the Senate's
investigation into Russian
interference in the 2016
election and whether President
Trump or his campaign
colluded with Russia's
attempts to sway the election
we first interviewed him
three weeks ago it is
very strange that any
presidential candidates and in
particular Republican
presidential candidate
would pair it so much of the
Russian line Republican
Senator James Lankford is
also on the Intelligence
Committee in some ways as
president Trump aligned
himself with the ideals
expressed by Russia yeah
he's pushing out the
messages that are consistent
with the Kremlin policies
and I would tell you every
opportunity that I have I
try to articulate very
clearly there's no question
that the Russians were
trying to hack into her
election there's no question
that we should have a strong
NATO and the United States
should be a part of that
NATO alliance do you
believe that he's not
echoing that because the
Russians have compromising
material on him I don't
know I hope not but the goal
of this investigation is
not only reconfirm Russian
intervention and explain
that to the American public
but to also see if there
was any contacts between
the Trump campaign and
the Russians and just
this week we learned that
last June Donald Trump jr.
met with lawyer Natalia
Vissel MIT skya and
lobbyists Rinat Akhmetov
both believed to have ties
to the Russian government I
spoke to Senator Warner again
last night this indication
that they were willing
to accept this information
from Russians and it was
part of an overall Russian
government effort to help
Trump and to hurt Clinton
I think this is the first
time the American public
has seen that in black and
white much of this town has
been worried about
Trump in Russia since he
became president current
administration officials
tell Newshour the White
House drafted an executive
order that would have
lifted sanctions imposed on
Russia over Ukraine senior
administration officials
and the intelligence
community successfully
lobbied against it and
this spring senators
passed a bill that would
restrict the president's
ability to lift those sanctions
the bill is not yet a
law but it was designed
to be a nearly unanimous
message to the President and
to Putin we believe
strongly that what Russia
continues to do they will
threaten Ukraine threaten
its neighbors threaten NATO
to continue to pry into
not only our elections
but other elections is
destabilizing it in a
demands a response what they've
yet to have a consequence
for what they did in
the election time and they
should in some ways the
president has fallen in
line on Sunday he tweeted
he wouldn't lift sanctions
on Russia over Ukraine
until Ukrainian and Syrian
problems are solved and
last week he also endorsed
article 5 NATO's collective
dissents the United States
has demonstrated not
merely with words but with
its actions that we stand
firmly behind article 5
the mutual defense
commitment that convinces
many in Moscow that the
u.s. establishment is
making sure the US remains
anti-russian Dmitri trenin is a
former Soviet Army colonel
who directs the Carnegie
center in Moscow the United
States has been remains
and will be the power that
defines a common Western ie
us driven foreign defense and
security policy and given that
treinen says the US remains
Russia's main adversary
and Russia is simply
targeting the US with whatever
tool it can I'm sure that
the Russians have been
looking at things I've been
hacking things have been
using the material that
they've hacked my are you
surprised that that you
are being packed this is a
method of espionage this
is what you do if you can
do it do it if you can't
protect against that
protect against it but don't
whine but it goes one step
further many in Russia
look at Washington's
turbulence and see a US
state considered strong and
unified suddenly weakened
and they're exploiting
that weakness in the US
foundation it is not so
coherent it is not so stable it
and it is vulnerable I
would say and we have seen
that we have seen what we
needed to see to see
vulnerability of American
society and with that
vulnerability with that
lack of unity both American
and Russian officials
acknowledged that Russian
interference in the
United States is going to
continue for all of us
at the PBS news hour
I'm Nick Schifrin
thanks for watching
you